CONSERT_INSTALLION.MD, before:

# CONSert Installation for HUA

## Introduction

The consert package is host to the CONSert (Connectional Silence Ensemble-BERT) algorithm which uses a combination of Random Forests, Convolutional Neural Networks, OpenAI Whisper Transcriptions and a BERT ML model to detect, locate and classify pauses. Pauses will be classified as either Non-Connectional, Emotional, or Invitational. 

Read more here: https://github.com/Heard-and-Understood/CONSert

## Installing the CONSert Package

This section of the guide is meant for HUA contributors who have access to the CONSert repository. The installation guide there has inaccuracies and can be streamlined for HUA contributors. 

As of 10/24/2024 testing and implementation of CONSert has been done with CONDA environments running python 3.10.11. The linux/macos version of this package must be run on python 3.10 or earlier. 

### Cloning the Repository

Start by cloning the repository from github into your desired directory and activating any desired virtual environment.

### Install Via pip

If you are a owner/maintainer/developer you can install the packagage via pip install (path to cloned repo).

```
pip install path/to/cloned/CONSert
```

### The Models

CONSert's pause detection require several models to run: CNN, RF, and BERT. The paths to the models are specified in:
```
CONSERT/consert/package.json
```
and look like this:

```
  "model_cache": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models",
  "model_temp": "~/Downloads",
  "trained_cnn_model_name": "cnn_pause_det_itr0_epoch0.hdf5",
  "trained_cnn_model_path": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/CNN/cnn_pause_det_itr0_epoch0.hdf5",
  "trained_rf_model_name": "rf_pause_det.pickle",
  "trained_rf_model_path": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/RF/rf_pause_det.pickle",
  "trained_bert_model_name": "bert_pause_class_10f_epoch0",
  "trained_bert_model_path": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/BERT/bert_pause_class_10f_epoch0"
```

Update your model paths by replacaing: aboslute/path/to/ with the absolute path to the original code directory. When you're done, save the packages.json file.

As of now the BERT models are too large to store in GitHub. The can be transferred as .tar compressed file using fileshare. Create a directory title BERT inside "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/ " and extract the tar file here.

### Whisper AI Transcription

As of 10/21/24 there is a bug in whisper_timestamped that causes it to fail transcriptions with the latest copy of Whisper. To avoid this, run the following once CONSert is fully installed:

```
pip3 install --upgrade --no-deps --force-reinstall git+https://github.com/openai/whisper.git@v20231117

```
This will downgrade the version of Whisper to the most recent compatable version. Whisper now includes timestamps, which it didn't when CONSert was developed. Eventually, we'll want to remove whisper_timestamped and use a more recent version of Whisper, instead.

Commit message:

fixed typos and added testing

CONSERT_INSTALLION.MD, after:

# CONSert Installation for HUA

## Introduction

The consert package is host to the CONSert (Connectional Silence Ensemble-BERT) algorithm which uses a combination of Random Forests, Convolutional Neural Networks, OpenAI Whisper Transcriptions and a BERT ML model to detect, locate and classify pauses. Pauses will be classified as either Non-Connectional, Emotional, or Invitational. 

Read more here: https://github.com/Heard-and-Understood/CONSert

## Installing the CONSert Package

This section of the guide is meant for HUA contributors who have access to the CONSert repository. The installation guide there has inaccuracies and can be streamlined for HUA contributors. 

As of 10/24/2024 testing and implementation of CONSert has been done with CONDA environments running python 3.10.11. The linux/macos version of this package must be run on python 3.10 or earlier. 

### Cloning the Repository

Start by cloning the repository from github into your desired directory and activating any desired virtual environment.

### Install Via pip

If you are a owner/maintainer/developer you can install the packagage via pip install (path to cloned repo).

```
pip install path/to/cloned/CONSert
```

### The Models

CONSert's pause detection requires several models to run: CNN, RF, and BERT. The paths to the models are specified in package.json which can be found here:
```
CONSERT/consert/package.json
```
and looks like this:

```
  "model_cache": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models",
  "model_temp": "~/Downloads",
  "trained_cnn_model_name": "cnn_pause_det_itr0_epoch0.hdf5",
  "trained_cnn_model_path": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/CNN/cnn_pause_det_itr0_epoch0.hdf5",
  "trained_rf_model_name": "rf_pause_det.pickle",
  "trained_rf_model_path": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/RF/rf_pause_det.pickle",
  "trained_bert_model_name": "bert_pause_class_10f_epoch0",
  "trained_bert_model_path": "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/BERT/bert_pause_class_10f_epoch0"
```

Update your model paths by replacaing: aboslute/path/to/ with the absolute path to the original code directory. When you're done, save the packages.json file.

As of now the BERT models are too large to store in GitHub. The can be transferred as .tar compressed file using fileshare. Create a directory title BERT inside "absolute/path/to/original_code/models/ " and extract the tar file here.

### Whisper AI Transcription

As of 10/21/24 there is a bug in whisper_timestamped that causes it to fail transcriptions with the latest copy of Whisper. To avoid this, run the following once CONSert is fully installed:

```
pip3 install --upgrade --no-deps --force-reinstall git+https://github.com/openai/whisper.git@v20231117

```
This will downgrade the version of Whisper to the most recent compatable version. Whisper now includes timestamps, which it didn't when CONSert was developed. Eventually, we'll want to remove whisper_timestamped and use a more recent version of Whisper, instead.

### Testing 

The CONSert repository now has a test_script.py file. Update the media_file fiel to have the correct path to your mp3 or wav. Similarly update the audio format field to the correct file type. 

````
media_file = 'path/to/test/file.wav'

audio_file_format = 'wav'
````
